---
layout: post
title: Research Meta Analysis
subtitle: "As Disraeli said, there are three kinds of lies: Lies, Damned Lies, and Statistics. On that note, let's talk about smoking."
cover-img: assets/img/cig-and-ecig.jpg
gh-repo: jmgurvitch/art-of-data
tags: [labs]
comments: true
---


In 2013, Bullen *et al.* published [“Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation: a randomised controlled trial”](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0140673613618425?casa_token=2HOBwyLstJIAAAAA:Y4WRqBHtQj7kC-KofNjfh7gNA-G65XF5zQvoXYQEVP6IDuGYJPcQY-_oqtfq_ZAplMandr5p0kc) in *The Lancet*. As smoking is a leading cause of lung cancer, which kills over one million people annually, smoking cessation presents a promising avenue by which worldwide lung cancer rates can be reduced. With that in mind, the researchers were interested in determining whether nicotine-containing e-cigarettes helped smokers to quit with a greater efficacy than did nicotine patches or placebo e-cigarettes, which, if confirmed, could fundamentally alter the paradigm of lung-cancer prevention. The researchers thus proposed the following alternative hypothesis: “nicotine e-cigarettes would be more effective than patches and placebo e-cigarettes for smoking reduction, tobacco dependence, and relief of withdrawal symptoms, and that they would have no greater risk of adverse events than nicotine patches.” It then follows that the null hypothesis was that e-cigarettes were no more effective than nicotine patches or placebo e-cigarettes at achieving any of the aforementioned objectives. 

Before we discuss the methodology and results, however, let’s take a look at the integrity of the study. At least one researcher belonged to one of the following institutions: the National Institute for Health Innovation in University of Auckland's School of Population Health; Health New Zealand, a company run by one of the researchers; the Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine in the UK Centre for Tobacco Control Studies at Queen Mary University of London; and the Department of Public Health and General Practice at the University of Otago. The researchers declared that they received no funding or other types of support from any relevant companies, such as cigarette sellers, although Health New Zealand had once consulted for an e-cigarette company in the past. A number of researchers had formerly received honoraria for speaking at meetings for smoking-cessation drugs, but none recently enough to warrant a conflict of interest statement. On the subject of funding, this study was funded by the Health Research Council of New Zealand, a government agency that manages the government’s investment in medical research. As the researchers state in the paper, “The sponsor of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.” Taken together, this information convinced me that all parties involved in the study had made a concerted effort to prevent any conflicts of interest and approach this important public health issue from as objective a standpoint as possible.

Despite a couple unavoidable shortcomings, the study boasted a rigorous experimental design that aimed to eliminate potential sources of bias. To sort the participants into nicotine-containing e-cigarette, nicotine patch, and placebo e-cigarette cohorts, the researchers used computerized block randomization, a tool that, according to statistician Martin Bland, “reduces opportunities for bias and confounding in experimental designs, and leads to treatment groups which are random samples of the population sampled, thus helping to meet assumptions of subsequent statistical analysis” (Bland, 2000). Additionally, the study's data collectors received no information about a given participant's treatment regimen. As a result, data was collected in a manner that minimized unconscious biases--that is, a desire to produce significant results--as much as possible. Furthermore, the cartridges given to participants in the e-cigarette groups were masked so that the presence of nicotine was unknown even to the user. With all of these checks in place, the researchers generated their own datasets from participant questionnaires and examinations. Unfortunately, despite the paper’s inclusion of tables and figures that summarized the data, I could not find the raw datasets online. This may be due to laws that mandate the protection of participants' identities, but even so it is inconvenient and opaque from a scientific standpoint.

Now, onto the procedure. The researchers recorded at seven-day intervals whether participants had relapsed, in addition to other information such as a participant’s daily nicotine consumption over time. What such a simple (not that simplicity is always a bad thing) and standardized metric does, however, is reduce the complexity of the participants. It cannot possibly take into account the vicissitudes of human existence. We live in a society, and when its inevitable concomitant stresses are obscured in a trial that includes people at high risk of relapse, we lose critical explanatory data points that could produce an erroneous conclusion. Additionally, a consequence of the participant-driven nature of the study was that self-reporting rates and adherence to treatment, by the researchers' admission, varied, leading to not-entirely comparable results across cohorts.

After collecting data over the course of six months, the researchers found that the achievement of abstinence was significantly lower than anticipated across all cohorts. This led them to be unable to confirm the alternative hypothesis. They observed that many participants quit smoking in the initial days of the study but soon relapsed. Despite its statistical insignificance, it may be worth noting that, among those who relapsed, the nicotine e-cigarette group had a median time to relapse that was over double that of the nicotine patch and placebo e-cigarette groups. Additionally, they did find that the amount by which nicotine e-cigarette users reduced their daily cigarette intake was significantly higher than that of placebo e-cigarette users. As stated above, however, these results should all be tempered by the flaws in the experimental design.

Although one could argue that the publish-or-perish mentality pervades all current scientific research, this study appears minimally susceptible to it. Most importantly, the study confirms its null hypothesis. While the researchers likely would have attracted more attention (and citations) had they modified the data to suggest that e-cigarettes are an effective aid for smokers seeking to quit, they did no such thing. And, for the record, the paper was nevertheless received well by the scientific community; at present, it has been cited over a thousand times. The researchers also took care to randomize their data and mask certain bias-inducing information, such as whether an e-cigarette was nicotine-containing or placebo, from both the experimenters and participants. Ultimately, no paper is free from imperfection, particularly in the data-collection stage, even if bias is actively rooted out; even so, this paper stands as a strong example of responsible science.
